Hello and welcome to the unit Testing for Unity Workshop Series.
Here we're going to be looking at prefabs.
Now up until this moment in the course we have not tested prefabs.
In the moments where I did want to test some monobehaviours, I created them from scratch using code
as shown in the previous videos.
But of course, a major fundamental building block in unity game development is the prefab.
Prefabs allow you to gather together various assets and functionality, put them in your project, and
easily reuse them either by dragging them into the scene so you save them in the scene and they're there,
or by dynamically creating them with code.
Now, why would we want to test these prefabs?
Well, in a very light form, imagine that your game uses a character prefab in an enemy prefab, perhaps
multiple of each.
You can have a unit test that creates just the player and validates that it doesn't throw any exceptions,
just that alone gives you a little bit more confidence that the asset works well over time.
And as you're collaborating with different non-programming talent, including level designers and artists,
you know that those prefabs have not accidentally been broken.
You can make some assumptions on the structure by using a test.
You can make assumptions on the serialized fields and check that they're properly populated, and you
can make assumptions on behavior of course, as well.
In the earlier character example, which did not use prefabs, I had a character script and I would
check to make sure that it could move properly around the world when I call it move by or move to functionality.
As you create complex prefabs with dependencies, you'd be able to call functionality on those prefabs
as well.
Now, tests can cover a small unit of code.
In the ideal world you have few lines and maybe no dependencies all the way up to a more complex system,
which if you know what you're doing when you're doing your unit testing, you can faithfully have a
test that executes over some dependencies as well, and gives you some assurance that those systems
are working well together.
A prefab is indeed probably your more complex on the end of that spectrum, and you're going to be testing
that.
The prefab can make use of its own custom components as well as unity components like rigidbody.
So be aware as you're setting these tests up that you're not testing too large of a system.
If, for example, your hero character is using rigid body and a custom flying component, you may want
to test the custom flying component separately in its own unit test.
Remember, there's always benefits to being able to break down and have less dependencies in your unit
testing.
But that said, we can indeed create a test that runs on an entire prefab, including its dependencies
if we see fit.
Let's take a look at an example of this in the code.
Here we are inside unity.
If I look at the test runner window here in the category, I have it set already to prefab.
And down here in this folder we're able to see that there's a prefab example.
Let's go ahead and open up the scene and just take a look at that scene running I'll go ahead and run
it.
So when I run that scene, a ball falls down with physics and slides along the floor.
It's not that particular behavior that we're interested in.
I just wanted to put an enemy prefab in the scene, see it exist in the production code here.
Simulating this would be your larger game menu, settings, scene, whatever it is, and having some
dependency on one or more mono behaviors on a on a prefab.
So with that set up, let's take a look at how we would go about testing it.
Now in this scene I have a editor test and also a runtime test.
But since this is testing more unity behavior and we've seen that mono behaviors, for example, are
something you want to test only at runtime.
Let's focus just on the play mode test here.
So I'm going to uncheck that one.
And here I've got a few different things we can do when this play mode test run, I check that the enemy
itself is not null.
That's the amount of behavior script.
Then I test that the game object it's sitting on is not null, and we would generally assume that if
the enemy exists, the game object does as well.
But this is just a further test on that.
And then finally we can check that the rigid body is not null.
So here we're checking mostly the structure of what we've got there.
But you could also check serialized fields, initialized public values, some of the behavior functionality
by calling methods on it.
You can do that on your own.
Expand what you see here and add your own testing functionality on top of new production code.
Get your feet wet with that and see how it goes for you.
Let's take a look at the source code here.
Here's the play mode test.
I'll take a look at those three tests, and then talk about the setup that's needed specifically for
prefabs.
So here we've got a very simple test.
We have the arrange, act and assert paradigm that we're used to seeing.
Notice that the arrange and act are suspiciously missing here.
And all I'm doing is checking that the enemy is not null.
In the next test that enemy game object is not null.
And finally, that enemy rigidbody is not null.
In the case of the rigid body.
That's a public field that I've created and it's serialized, and I assume a properly set up prefab
of that would already have that serialized field declared and populated.
So it all passes.
So everything's going good.
Now, how do we get the prefab here?
Notice that we're using play mode testing.
As we've seen a play mode test runs in its own dynamically created empty scene.
So anything that we want to do on that, we have to manually set up ourselves.
So we're going to take advantage of the text fixture and some of the things we can do with the test
fixture.
So one of the things we can do up here is we're going to set up a reference to how long to delay allowing
the prefab to be instantiated, the path to the enemy prefab itself.
Notice the path there begins with assets.
That's going to be important in a second.
And then I have a reference to the private enemy.
Now, in addition to the test attribute that we've used quite a bit, there's a setup attribute that
will run once before every test method.
So here what we want to do before every test method is we simply load that asset at the path we.
Get a reference to the enemy sitting on that game object once we instantiate it, and then we wait a
three seconds or some arbitrary amount of time, actually realize that it doesn't need three seconds.
It probably needs one frame.
So you could experiment with what you do there.
I just wait up to, I think, a half a second here.
The reason we need that is that I've seen that when you do game object dot instantiate, you need to
wait an entire frame for the awake to be called and the start to be called on that game object.
So depending what you're doing in that awake and that start in your monobehaviour, you may need to
wait a little bit longer.
I would guess waiting 2 or 3 frames across all the board on all your situations would probably be enough.
But here I'm just doing a half a second and you can fool around with that and see if it meets your needs.
Then down here I use the Teradyne attribute.
This is called once after each of the test methods.
So in the setup we create the prefab.
Then the test gets run.
And in the teardown what I do is clean it up.
Now you could also as an alternative you could do the setup and the teardown equivalents within every
single test.
If you wanted to do that, you could.
But I'm taking advantage of being able to reuse some existing methods here.
So I only declare the setup once and the teardown once.
And I know dependably those are going to be called before and after every test method.
So that's it.
Let's take a look at the enemy script itself just to see how that's set up.
So the enemy is a very simple monobehaviour.
I don't really need to do anything to make it testable, but just to have something exciting here to
be able to test.
I have a serialized field of rigidbody, and then I have a test that assumes it's populated.
Now, looking at the code, you can see that there's nothing that actually populates it.
But if we go look in unity and click on the prefab, we'll see that the prefab is what makes that association.
So let's check that now.
So back here in unity we go down.
We look at the enemy prefab.
And we can see here on the right the prefab has an enemy script.
And it already has the rigid body declared.
If somehow I was to forget that.
Or perhaps someone on your team breaks this aspect of the prefab, then let's run those tests again.
And we can see that the rigid body is null has failed.
So that's a very simple example of a system that you've got that functions and then it breaks.
Now if you're a unity game developer and you've worked on teams before, I'm sure you've had the experience
that you or someone that you work with has accidentally broken a prefab.
It's a very common workflow.
You might not see any errors in the unity editor.
You might even be able to play the game, and in certain circumstances, you don't see the effect of
that until the final moment when that particular rigid body is being used or the functionality that's
missing is being called.
So this is a wonderful way that you can have everyone on your team follow the following workflow.
Hey, any time you're going to pull from git and do some changes to the assets level, design, etcetera,
make sure you open the test runner window and simply hit run selected or run all and execute them all.
You'll see everything pass well.
Then before you commit your work again, do it again and if and when you've noticed that someone commits
something that passed the tests but broke something, you want to add a new unit test that perhaps tests
for the enemies flying script existing or whatever is the offending part, and then you now have a legacy
of a little more testing that makes sure that particular instance doesn't happen again.
You don't necessarily have to test for every single thing of the prefab up front.
You want to look at your team's workflows and identify some low hanging fruit for things that could
be fixed most easily.
Then add some light tests for that.
It's very easy once you have this test here for one particular prefab to run it on a bunch of prefabs,
you could, in theory have one testing script that tests a large number of different prefabs, doing
the little bit of just making sure no null refs are happening, no exceptions are thrown.
The game objects exist, the prefab can be found.
You could do that all within one if you wanted to.
What I'm showing here is one particular script for one particular prefab, and you can decide how to
scale that up.
That's it for this.
Talk about using prefabs and unit testing together.
Thanks.